Hello, my name is Smirnova Nadezhda, I am a teacher at the Moscow Business School,
at the same time I teach at the Russian Academy of Sciences,
I am a candidate for science and a lecturer in the Department of Economic Theory.
Today we are going to study the course on strategic management.
This is the beginning of the module on strategic management.
What are we going to study today?
We will study the concept of strategy, we will study the evolution of this concept,
we will study the ten schools of strategic management,
we will study the cycle of strategic management,
and we will focus on how the mission and the vision of the company are formulated.
We will study how the levels of strategy formation are determined,
and we will determine the role of the manager in the development of the strategy.
The first section that we are starting to study now is the concept of strategy.
To do this, we will define strategic management.
There are many of them, they were given by different authors.
For example, Shendell and Hutton define strategic management as a process of determining interaction.
Organization with its environment, expressed through the use of selected goals and achieving the desired result.
By distributing resources to the organization in accordance with the effective plan of action.
On the other hand, the famous economists Thomson and Strickland define strategic management as a process
with which managers arrange and establish the long-term direction of the organization's development.
They define its specific and unique goals, develop strategies, their achievements,
using all possible internal and external circumstances,
and take the chosen path, the action plan into account.
Smith, Arnold, Beazle propose another definition of strategic management.
This is a process of assessing the external environment, formulating organizational goals, making decisions,
their implementation and control, focused on achieving goals in the present and future external environment of the organization.
In principle, if we look at these three definitions, they have a lot in common.
Therefore, we can combine them and give our own.
Strategic management is a management activity related to setting goals and tasks of the organization,
maintaining a number of relations between the organization and the external environment,
the company's environment, which allows the company to achieve the goals it has set for itself,
and allows it to remain receptive to the external conditions and requirements imposed by the environment.
Now let's move on to the word strategy, the concept of strategy.
Again, different authors formulate the definition of this concept in different ways.
According to Steiner and Meier, strategy is the formulation of the mission of the organization,
the mission of the company, its intentions, its goals, policies, programs and methods of achievement.
According to Gluck, strategy is a unified, integrated and understandable plan,
developed in such a way as to be confident in achieving the goals of the enterprise.
Mintzberg and McHugh formulate the concept of strategy in a different way.
It is a model, an example of behavior in the flow of future actions or decisions.
Again, if we apply the unification algorithm, we will get a generalized definition of the concept of strategy.
Then the strategy is a model of interaction of all resources,
which allows the organization to fulfill its mission in the best possible way and achieve stable competitive advantages.
When we have determined what a strategy is, we should define what the subject is.
The subject is an organization under which an open, complex social and economic system is understood,
which is a group of units, or sometimes they are called business units.
On the other hand, the subject of the creation of a strategy can be the group of units, or business units.
That is, it is a direction or a series of adjacent directions of the company's activities,
which is independent and market-oriented, which can be a full-fledged competitor in its market segment,
which is associated with the external environment, with suppliers, consumers, competitors.
On the other hand, the subject of the strategy can be the so-called functional zones of the organization.
This is a certain sphere of activity, which is represented by functional structural units.
For example, a functional zone of the organization is management of staff or the financial sphere.
Accordingly, these functional structural units specialize in the performance of certain functions
and provide effective activity, both for the business units themselves, where they are located, and for the organization as a whole.
When we have determined what the subject is, we need to look at the object.
The object of the strategy can be three types of problems.
The first type of problems is problems that are directly related to the most important goals of the company, general goals,
which are focused on the future, as a rule, aimed at improving the efficiency of the company's activities,
aimed at the implementation and development of the communication of goals, resources, which are necessary for the implementation of these goals,
and the results that will be obtained as a result of using resources to achieve the goals set before the company.
On the other hand, the second type of problems is problems and solutions related to some element of the organization,
if this element is necessary to achieve the goals set, but at the moment it is either not presented in sufficient volume or is not present in the company at all.
And finally, the third type of problems that can be an object of the strategy is problems related to uncontrolled external factors of the organization.
The organization in its activity cannot influence everything, but is forced to adapt.
It is unlikely that some company can influence the entry of Russia into the ITU.
However, it will have to adapt to these conditions when Russia takes this step.
In addition to determining the subject and the object, we must get acquainted with the principles of strategic management.
There are five principles of strategic management.
1. Perspectivity, 2. Priority, 3. Realizability, 4. Step-by-step or iterativeness, 5. Complexity.
When we talk about perspective, we mean that strategic decisions should be designed for the long-term perspective.
As a rule, the company's strategy is built for 3, 5, 7, sometimes 10, sometimes 15 years.
For example, a factory built by one of the famous oligarchs for the production of juices was designed for a purchase period of 15 years.
This is the most modern production in Russia.
Priority. This principle tells us that the management must consistently adhere to the chosen path of development.
The external environment is changing, the internal environment of the organization is changing, the personnel is changing, the corporate culture is changing.
At the same time, the management must consistently adhere to the plan, knowing how to adjust it in accordance with the changing conditions.
The main goal of the organization is not to become like a swan, a crayfish, a pike.
All the desires of the organization should not be diversified, but on the contrary, they should be collected in a bundle.
In fact, I said this word not in vain, this is a used term.
The goals should be collected in a bundle and directed to the implementation of the main general plan of the company's development, the strategic plan.
The next principle is feasibility. Goals should be achievable, but they should be difficult.
The tasks are difficult, but feasible.
This is the main principle, because if the goals are not achievable, after a while, people, namely people who are one of the most important resources of the organization, give up and the strategy will not be implemented.
Finally, the penultimate principle is stage or iterativeness.
We are talking about long-term strategic solutions, long-term strategic initiatives.
They are carried out only with the help of certain events that are tactical and short-term.
That is, the achievement of the final goal in 3, 5, 7 years is a multi-stage sequence.
Thus, the achievement of the final goal is a multi-stage sequence.
It must be constantly monitored, the implementation of events aimed at achieving goals must be constantly monitored.
In the gap between the beginning of the path and the achievement of the strategic goal, certain reference points must be set, which must be monitored.
Are we really going in this direction? Do we really achieve what we wanted?
The difficulty here is that the process of strategic management is cyclical.
It has no beginning, no end.
Hence, the difficulties with building a control system, a monitoring system for the implementation of the strategy.
We will talk about this in great detail in the following topics.
And finally, the last principle is complexity.
It is that we need all-round accounting and information analysis.
Only this allows us to react in time to changes in the external and internal environment.
We need to track all the narrow places.
But there is also a reversal side of the coin.
It is important for us not to get stuck in the stream of information and not to analyze it, only for the sake of analysis.
There are companies in which the development of a strategy has never taken place.
Due to the fact that the process of strategic diagnostics, the process of collecting and analyzing information,
the statistics of its development, the development of the company, has been so long that it is simply impossible to reach the strategy.
Please, complete the task presented in your workbook.
The development of the strategy
Now let's move on to evolution, to how the concept of strategy developed.
Let's consider 10 schools of strategic management.
Since the 1960s, strategic management as a scientific field has begun to develop rapidly.
At first, the practice of research was developing quite slowly, there were few publications.
Then there was a significant acceleration, but it was one-sided.
In the 1970s, the development of strategic management was pulled to one side, in the 1980s to the other.
In the 1990s, the offensive on all fronts was launched.
And today it is a very dynamically developing sphere.
The first, easily identifiable and determined schools gave a push to the subsequent ones.
The subsequent ones were more complex, more detailed.
The chart shows three schools that developed in the 1970s and 1990s.
The design school, the planning school and the positioning school.
If the design and planning schools have lost their popularity, then the positioning school still retains its importance today.
Now let's take a closer look at each of the schools.
The design school is associated with the description.
Strategy is a unique, pre-planned perspective.
The development of strategy is dominated by a management that assesses past activity and, based on it, rethinks the company's activity.
Changes to the strategy are rare, but significant.
All organizational activity is regulated.
At the same time, the organization, if we can say so, is machine-like.
Everything is centralized.
The key points are the coordination of actions, the correspondence of the past, present and, accordingly, vision of the future.
The development of competitive advantages of the company is realized by mechanistic work, such as SWOT analysis.
Thus, we can formulate a motto that belongs to the design school.
Measure seven times, cut once.
The second school that developed in the 1980s is the planning school.
The planning school considers strategy as a long-term action plan.
Thanks to this plan of action, the company can and should shape its future.
At the same time, the main thing is that the approach is rational.
The most important thing in the creation of a strategy is the vision of the company, the main strategist.
The main strategist is either the owner or the top management of the company.
In order to form such a plan of action, the company must look back, look at how it developed in the past.
That is, the development of plans uses information related to the results of the company's activities, which were carried out later, in the past, the statistics of which are accumulated in the company.
Thus, the development of a strategy is a formal process, a specific process.
For many works of representatives of the planning school, it is characteristic to use certain canonical methods of analysis.
One of these is the SWOT analysis.
How to conduct SWOT analysis, what it is, will be told to you in the following topics of this module.
In fact, now I will only note the main feature of this method, the method of diagnostics.
This is a strategic audit, that is, an analysis of the chances and threats in the company's environment and an analysis of its strong and weak sides, which follows from the name.
SWOT is an abbreviation for the strength, weakness, chances, threats.
The planning result, based on the company's diagnostics, its audit, audits of its activities, becomes ready for the implementation of the strategy.
This is a document that describes who and what should do.
This is a complete detail of the entire strategic concept, which provides for the detection of mid-term plans, bringing these plans to the level of one year,
detailed quarterly, monthly action programs for each unit in the company, taking into account the appointment of responsibility centers,
distribution of resources, calculation of budgets for each unit and the connection of all these elements with the company's strategy.
That is, in fact, a hierarchy of plans, programs and budgets.
The planning school was criticized by Henry Mintzberg in the work of the take-off and landing of strategic planning.
He criticized the planning school on two levels.
In the practical, he said that it is unlikely to seriously hope that the executors, who are isolated from the process of strategic management,
from the adoption and development of the same plans and programs, will be interested in the implementation of such a plan.
And if the company carries out some kind of decentralization of this process, then this is only a visibility,
since the final decisions will still be made by the executives.
On the other hand, he notes that any planning limits the flexibility of the company.
That is, any event that happens in the environment, and, as a rule, the short-term influence of the environment,
it can be either positive or negative or neutral, we are not given anything else.
And not using the chances that the environment gives the company.
And not carrying out any events that can protect the company from emerging threats,
in principle, put its survival on the market at risk.
When there is a tough plan and it is carried out tough,
we understand that the company's mobility and quick response can be reduced.
Mintzberg notes that planning is not an objective, not a technical process.
Planning is a process that allows for the manoeuvring between the coalitions that exist in the company.
It allows for the emergence of conflicts,
which means that the effectiveness of the planning that this school promotes is reduced.
And another point is criticized at the practical level of Mintzberg.
This is a tough control system, control of the results according to the plans created, the so-called fact-analysis plan.
We have planned something for a certain period of time, we have done something,
we must determine the deviation between the planned results and the actual ones,
analyze why it happened and take some adjustment measures.
Since this tough control system adds additional effort and costs related to the implementation and implementation of the strategy,
it suppresses the initiative and limits the desire to take risks.
Unprecedented changes that may occur in the company's environment may not meet the company's desired response in this case.
At the same time, this is a practical level.
Mintzberg also talks about three fundamental mistakes in the planning school.
This is a strategic level of criticism of Mintzberg.
First, this is a representation of the nature of organizational reality as deterministic.
The belief in the possibility of forecasting in a complex and non-permanent environment is not justified.
We live in a world of uncertainty.
In the morning, when we turn on the shower, we can face the fact that the water will not flow from there.
Attempts to develop scenarios, attempts to develop alternative plans are good and beautiful in theory.
In practice, there are many, many problems.
And a standard version with the development of a pessimistic, optimistic, realistic scenario may simply not be enough in reality.
The second mistake that Mintzberg notes is the division of the processes of strategy development and its implementation.
In fact, this is a very true and important remark.
Strategies and implementers are those between which a conflict arises.
A conflict that reduces efficiency.
And the intellectual potential of most employees in planning and strategy is cut off in this case.
And finally, the third fundamental mistake that Mintzberg notes is the belief in the possibility of institutionalization of intuition and innovation through the formalization of the planning process.
Planning is always analytical.
And strategy development is a search for synthesis, a search for synergy.
Therefore, the term strategic planning contains an internal contradiction.
Planning destroys or cannot use the initiative and creative approach necessary for the development of a strategy.
Now let's move on to the positional school.
Let's try to consider it in the same way.
The basic positions and some kind of criticism.
The starting point for creating and analyzing a strategy in a positional school is the company's environment.
It is the structure of the environment that determines the effectiveness of the company's strategy and its success.
The most famous analytical method that the positional school promotes is the Porter model.
Porter analyzes the environment through the prism of the five main forces.
The strength of suppliers, the strength of buyers, the threat from the new environment, the danger from the substitutes and the nature of competitive rivalry.
In more detail, the Porter model, the model of the five forces of Porter, or as it is now called the model of the nine forces of Porter-Matthews,
where globalization is added, where informationization, society, and so on, will be considered in the next topics of the strategic management module.
In this context, the essence of the development of a strategy is victory, is the struggle with competitors.
Therefore, we can say that a certain military analogy is typical of the positional school.
The positional school identifies the path to success.
The path to success lies through the minimization of costs and differentiation.
The creation of a strategy is considered as a process.
The process is like a chess game.
It consists of certain moves, certain choices, which a good player should know before entering this game.
It is in the positional school that the tree of decisions is built.
In fact, at the fundamental level, the strategic choice concerns the way to create a competitive advantage.
In this context, the way is just the minimization of costs and differentiation.
In the school of positioning, the main idea is analysis.
Therefore, the motto of the school of positioning can be only facts.
We talked with you about three chiefs of the strategic management schools.
We talked about the pre-schools.
Now let's talk about the descriptive schools.
There are more of them.
This is the school of entrepreneurship, this is the cognitive school, the school of education, the school of power, the school of culture or cultural school, the school of the external environment and the school of configuration.
Each of them has several words.
These are the main positions that characterize these schools.
Please note that these schools began to appear in the 1960s, but their development began after the 1980s.
The main peak of development occurs after the 1990s.
So, in order, the school of entrepreneurship.
The main prerequisites of the school of entrepreneurship are as follows.
The strategy exists in the mind of the leader.
He understands what the future is.
He intuitively chooses the direction of movement.
He foresees the future of the organization.
Therefore, the main emphasis is on foreseeing.
The process of forming a strategy can be called semi-conscious.
It is based on intuition, on the life experience of the company's leader.
It does not matter whether this strategy is born in the head of the leader or he perceives this strategy from the outside.
The leader promotes his concept.
He personally controls its implementation.
He personally makes timely adjustments in the implementation of the strategy.
Therefore, for strategic foreseeing within the framework of the school of entrepreneurship, we lay down a certain flexibility.
Thus, it turns out that the entrepreneurial strategy is both well-thought-out,
and, from the point of view of a holistic concept, is developing,
since the details are determined by the company's leader.
The entrepreneurial organization is distinguished by flexibility,
since it is relatively simple, fast, and clearly responds to the instructions of the structure's leader.
What can it be?
It is a startup, a company with one owner,
and it reacts quickly to the offer and instructions of this owner for any changes.
On the other hand, it can be a large company,
in which procedures and power relations are strictly prescribed.
And in which the leader, the guru of freedom of maneuver, is left.
It should be noted that the entrepreneurial strategy is difficult to find.
Thus, it is protected from the influence of direct competition in the market niche where the company exists.
The main prerequisites of the cognitive school.
The supporters of the cognitive school describe their activities based on the psychological concept.
The strategic process is carried out through the cognitive abilities of a person.
From here you can highlight the main positions.
First, the formation of a strategy is a process that flows through the head of the leader or chief strategist.
In fact, it is a process of knowledge.
Thus, strategies are born as certain perspectives, certain concepts.
In many books of representatives of the cognitive school there is a term frame.
This is a set of certain emerging frames.
These perspectives prescribe a way of obtaining information from the environment.
Based on the information obtained in accordance with one of the branches of the cognitive school,
which is called the objective, this information is decrypted using cognitive maps.
It passes through all possible distorting filters.
In fact, it is just an interpretation of the world that exists only in the form in which it is perceived.
That is, the visible world can be modeled, structured and designed.
Of course, this can be disputed.
One of the famous physicists said that the best model of a cat is a cat itself.
However, such a theory exists.
The next school that we should consider is the school of education.
The key point of the school of education is that it is based not so much on prescriptions, but on descriptions.
Supporters of this school are not tired of asking a simple, but extremely important question.
How is an organizational strategy actually formed?
Not how it is formulated, but how it is formed.
The main positions of the school of education are the complex and unpredictable nature of the external environment of the organization.
Often, in conjunction with the need to constantly update the knowledge necessary for the development of a strategy,
this need prevents the implementation of weighted control.
After all, the development of a strategy must first of all take the form of a learning process.
At least during the period when the formulation and implementation are carried out, and then these processes become inseparable.
Perhaps the best student in the organization should be its head.
He must be educated.
But much more often there is a place for the training of the team.
This is at least what happens in most organizations.
As a rule, most organizations have many potential strategists.
The training procedure has a developing nature.
Through behavior that contributes to thinking, directed at the understanding of some actions that were undertaken in the organization,
strategic initiatives are carried out by those who have the ability and resources for training.
Thus, strategies can arise in the most unexpected places and in the most unusual way.
Some initiatives develop on their own, by trial and error.
Others are picked up by the leading leaders, key people in the company, and they support the development of these ideas.
Successful initiatives, successfully implemented initiatives, form the experience of the company,
which can grow into a behavior scheme, that is, into a self-developing strategy.
As a rule, at the current stage, companies are trying to organize something similar through the implementation of design offices,
by all kinds of activities to support any innovative ideas coming from employees,
help them in development and submission of such innovative proposals.
The role of the leadership, if we return to the position of the school of education,
is not in the attempt to imagine in advance what the consciously developed strategies will be,
but in order to manage the strategic training process.
In this context, strategic management includes the skill of recognizing the interrelationship and thoughts between actions.
Believe me, this recognition is very difficult.
Control and training, stability and changes that the company faces.
But now let's move on.
The next school is the school of power.
Power relationships not only entangle each organization, they are inside it.
And in the school of power, two branches are formed.
The first branch is the micro-power.
It has to do with the game of political forces,
illegitimate or illegitimate power, but within the organization,
primarily in the processes of strategic management.
And the second branch is macro-politics.
It considers the use of power levers of the organization itself, including at the external level.
Administrative resources, lobbying, and so on.
If we consider the creation of a strategy as a process of planning, analysis, knowledge and training,
we return to the schools that we have already listed,
then it can be interpreted as a deal and as a compromise between conflicting individuals, groups and coalitions.
It is enough to introduce a certain factor of unpredictability.
Whether it is the variability of the external environment, the duality of the goals,
various options for perceiving the situation, and so on.
And this is already politics.
And this is already the school of power.
Thus, the school of power develops the prerequisites that were developed before them.
The main positions that are characteristic of the school of power.
Regarding the formation of a strategy.
Formation is determined by the authorities, by the political forces.
Be it processes that take place within the organization, or certain actions of the organization in the external environment.
Thus, the strategies developed usually have a spontaneous nature and take the form of a position.
But this is not a perspective.
The micro-power considers the creation of a strategy as an interaction based on methods of persuasion, negotiations.
Sometimes it is a simple confrontation.
In fact, a political game around intersecting interests, forming coalitions.
It is not for nothing that when developing a strategy at the current stage, it is necessary to identify the groups of interest and take into account their interests.
The macro-power.
The macro-power considers the organization as striving for its own well-being.
How?
By controlling the actions of other agents, objects presented on the market.
Either direct influence, or coalitions, or cooperation with them.
At the same time, the companies rely on both strategic maneuvering and development of collective strategies in various types of alliances that may arise.
The school of culture.
The school of culture focuses mainly on the role of culture in maintaining the strategic stability of the company.
Very rarely in active resistance to strategic changes.
Culture can be studied from the position of a third-party observer or from the inside, from the position of representatives of this culture.
Hence, the division into two branches of the cognitive school.
The first one is objective in relation to why people behave in a certain way and explains their actions with the uniqueness of social and economic relations.
The second branch considers culture as a subjective process, which has nothing to do with some universal abstract logic.
The main prerequisites of the school of culture are formulated as follows.
The formation of a strategy is a process of social interaction based on common goals for the participants in the organization, beliefs, understandings, and goals.
The belief of the individual is the result of the processes of communication to a certain culture, the culture of the organization, the company.
As a rule, this is not expressed clearly, it is not verbal.
Although, of course, formal education can strengthen the formation of the individual's belief.
Therefore, the company can only partly characterize the beliefs on which their culture is based.
At the same time, its sources of explanation may remain incomprehensible to them.
Hence, the strategy takes shape primarily by perspective, and only secondarily by the position rooted in collective aspirations.
It is not necessarily explicitly expressed.
It is not necessary at all that the strategy is a plan or a talmud developed in the company.
It is necessary to understand the structure of the organization and the models reflected in it, which protect the deep resources and opportunities of the organization, which form the basis of its competitive advantages.
Thus, the main characteristic of the strategy is predeterminedness, even if it is not a fully conscious and unregulated strategy.
Culture, and especially ideology, help not to change the strategy, but to preserve it.
At best, they allow adjustments within the general strategic perspective of the organization.
What is the danger of the strategy school?
It is dangerous because it tries to disprove the need for change.
Its representatives are in favor of permanence, which is so necessary to all of us in the psychological sense, of permanence in management, of a stable movement in the course planned.
Culture is strong, strong, well-designed, there are resources, they are established, they are understandable.
Emphasizing the importance of traditions, unanimity, characterizing changes as any complex processes, the culture school contributes to stagnation.
It is very difficult to create a culture, but it is even more difficult to change it.
At the same time, it is very easy to destroy, it is not a problem.
There is another drawback of the culture school.
It consists in the fact that strategic advantages are equated, in fact, a sign of co-existence is put between strategic advantages and organizational uniqueness.
It is great not to be like others, but when differences become a goal, we come to the desire to become unique, and this leads to excessive self-confidence.
The next school is the school of the external environment.
If the rest of the schools consider the external environment as one of the factors that must be taken into account, it is very important, then the school of the external environment considers the external environment as the main participant.
The authors who share such approaches tend to take away the passive role of the organization.
The organization just reacts to the changes in the surrounding world.
And the creation of a strategy is just a process of adaptation, a process of some kind of reflection.
In principle, we can say that this approach takes the school of the external environment beyond the strategic management.
Because there is a contradiction here.
We no longer manage, we only adapt.
However, the school of the external environment helps to balance the general idea of ​​strategy formation by including the external environment as a third force.
We have a leadership, we have an organization, and the third force appears, the external environment.
The external environment can be different.
The school of the external environment highlights the characteristics of the external environment.
The external environment can have stability, which varies from stable to dynamic.
Complexity.
The environment of the company varies from simple to complex.
Market diversity, which varies from integrated to diversified systems.
And hostility.
The environment can be hostile or generous.
The main messages of the school of the external environment are as follows.
The external environment manifests itself as a set of forces.
A set of forces of common character.
And is the main element of the process of creating an organizational strategy.
The company must either react adequately to these forces, or it will be forced to leave the market.
Thus, the management is considered as a passive element of the strategic process.
Its task is to understand, identify external forces and ensure the adaptation of the organization to their changes.
Thus, organizations are gathered together in special niches.
Ecological niches.
Where they remain until their resources are depleted.
Or until the hostility of the environment becomes excessive.
Then the organization stops its activity.
The next school.
The school of configuration.
The school of configuration is fundamentally different from all other areas of strategic management.
The fact is that it is ready for the general application.
I propose a specific way to combine all strategic ideas, all schools.
Configuration and transformation.
These words reflect two main aspects of the school of configuration.
Stable structures of the company and the external environment are considered as configurations.
And the process of developing a strategy is a transformation.
If we combine all the prerequisites, then the school of configuration differs from all the others.
Most of the time the company can be described as a stable configuration of its components.
It is meant that for a certain period of time the company adopts a clearly defined form.
Designed organizational structure.
This form is adequate to a certain context.
This, in turn, defines the behavior of the company and, as a result, the set of strategies that it implements.
Such periods of stability are interrupted from time to time.
They are interrupted by jumping to another configuration.
That is, they are interrupted by transformation.
The alternation of processes of stable state and transitional transformation process is built up over time in a certain sequence.
This is the concept of life cycles of the organization, which we have discussed in different modules.
Thus, the main goal of strategic management is to maintain the stability of the organization over relatively long periods of time.
Or, at least, those changes that fit into the strategy of the organization.
At the same time, during the period of need for changes, transformation, strategic management is designed to ensure the management of the process of transition from the state as it is to the state as it should be and preservation of the company's life cycle during this period.
Accordingly, the process of building a strategy is reduced to the development of concepts or formal planning,
to systematic analysis of the vision of the management and constant training or competitive policy,
to the concentration on individual training, to collective socialization or to the limited reaction to the impact of the external environment.
However, the mandatory condition is the timeliness of the actions taken, their adequacy to what is happening.
The resulting strategy is taken in the form of plans, schemes, positions, prospects, tricks that are used by the organization.
The conspectus presented to you contains a table in which the criteria for comparative analysis of the ten strategic management schools are given.
There are three aspects. The main characteristics, including the sources, basic discipline, supporters, the implied idea, the real idea, the motto that is stated by the school and the key words that are used in the works of the representatives of the corresponding school.
The second aspect of comparison is the characteristics of the process maintenance. Strategy, basic process, changes, the main acting person, organization, management of the external environment, the attitude of the school according to these criteria.
And finally, the context characteristic, the situation that best corresponds to the environment, the form of the organization and the stage of the organization's development.
The chart shows the ratio, the position of the different schools. Pay attention, the view of the school of positioning is turned back on the established historical data, which is analyzed and introduced into the process of creating a strategy.
The school of planning, design and entrepreneurship is directed forward, but only in the future. This is the composition of the plans of the strategies. The school of design looks far ahead, to the strategic perspective.
And the school of entrepreneurship looks over the edge and the other side of the nearest obstacles, creating a unique picture of the future. The school of education and power, entangled in trifles, are stuck somewhere at the bottom. They are interested not so much in the forest as in the trees.
The school of education, looking at the ground, at the base, often looks down. The school of power is involved in what is happening even lower, under the stones, sometimes even underground, reaching places that organizations do not always want to advertise.
The school of culture looks at everything that is happening from above. And even higher is the school of the external environment. It, so to speak, observes. In contrast to the cognitive school, which tries to look inside the process through a microscope, unlike, say, the inverted telescope of the school of environment.
The school of configuration looks at the process, or, one might say, looks at this process. And now, complete the task presented in the workbook.
The next section is the cycle of strategic management.
According to Okofa, wisdom is the ability to see the distant consequences of current actions. The willingness to make quick gains for the sake of future benefits. The construction of a strategy implies the obligatory presence of a strategic plan.
Strategic management is the sequence of actions and decisions taken by the higher authorities to develop specific strategies that will ensure the achievement of the goals of the organization. The lack of a clearly formulated strategy deprives managers of the ability to assess the goals and direction of the company's development, to manage the staff purposefully and effectively.
Very often, a formulated strategy may not exist. As a rule, there is an unformalized strategy. It should be said that in this model, the strategic management model, the management process can be considered as a cycle.
First, we formulate the strategic vision and mission of the company. Based on the vision, which we will talk about a little later, the goal is set. The strategy is developed. The developed strategy goes through the implementation stage.
Then the assessment of the activity is carried out at each stage of the strategic plan. Changes are tracked and adjustments are made. Since the process is cyclical, revision is possible at each stage. Adjustment is possible at each stage.
The cyclical process means that we do not know where we start. Indeed, from the vision, or from the setting of goals, or from the development of strategies, or from tracking results.
The direction of strategic management can be as follows. First of all, it is the distribution of resources. This direction involves the distribution of limited strategic resources in the organization. Any resources used by the organization in its activities are limited.
If we had a magic wand and our resources were not limited, then there would be no management and economy. At the level of strategic planning, we are talking about resources that have a long-term impact on the company's activities. Resources that can be used in many ways.
Hence, the task is to form and accumulate these resources. And the formation and accumulation of resources requires time and effort.
As a rule, such resources include capital in the form of money, production buildings, facilities, equipment, management talents, qualified personnel, especially today, in the conditions of a shortage of qualified personnel, technological and technical experience of the company.
The next direction is adaptation to the environment. Adaptation should be interpreted in the broadest sense of the word. It covers all the actions of strategic nature that improve the company's relationship with its environment.
Adaptation involves both the development of favorable opportunities and the risks and adverse changes that pose a risk to the company. Adaptation involves the study and analysis of the external environment at the moment and, accordingly, forecasting possible variants of event development.
The next direction is internal coordination. It includes coordination of strategic activity for the best use of the organization's advantages and alleviation of negative consequences, as any company, any object has its weak points.
As I said, any company has both strong and weak sides that it should use. The company should try to develop these sides.
The next direction is organizational strategic planning. It involves the formation of organizational prerequisites, the setting and achievement of promising goals in the company.
This activity involves systematic development of managers' thinking by forming a company that is able to learn from past strategic decisions. These decisions can be used in their activities.
Another model of strategic management involves the consideration of the logical hierarchy of the stages of strategy formation. It is shown on the slide. This hierarchy shows the sequence of stages of strategy formation, from the formulation of goals to the detailed sequence of actions that are necessary to achieve this goal.
If we look at this hierarchy, the choice of the mission is the most important step. In the middle of the pyramid is the formulation of long-term, medium-term, short-term goals.
Finally, the development of the supporting plans and instructions for making operational decisions. These are policies, tactics, procedures, rules and budgets, in which we take into account the necessary resources.
The organization's activities are divided into two parts. The business and the management system. The management system is designed to make the business work effectively and the company successful.
In addition, the actions of the company can be divided into operational and strategic. Thus, we get four areas of activity.
The practice has shown that in small companies, which have just been created, the first area is the operational activity, which is directly related to the business.
The second area is the operational management system. This is understandable, otherwise the company cannot survive. As the company grows, as it develops, the managers are forced to pay more and more attention not only to the further development of the business, but, if the company wants to be successful, to the improvement of the management system.
It should be noted that the lagging of the development of the management system from the pace of growth of the business is a common problem for many fast-growing companies.
The problem is related to both management of the staff, internal business processes and decision-making. For example, one of the companies related to the intellectual business.
The company is located at the start-up, it is characterized by rapid growth, the management system lags behind. What is it expressed? It is expressed in the fact that all business processes in the company are not yet registered, not yet formalized.
The result is that the decisions are starting to be late. Too many agreements, it is too difficult to find a center of responsibility, it is too difficult to find someone who is responsible for this process, for this decision.
Or it is difficult to reach someone who makes all the decisions, because he is involved in the whole process. Or another example. Also a fast-growing telecommunications business. The company has been growing for several years, more than five times a year.
Can you imagine what kind of business level it is? The problem is related to the fact that the management system does not have time to develop for such a fast-growing company.
What is the problem? During this period, 80% of the staff has changed. During this period, the company has accumulated internal fatigue from constant changes and from the constant feat that is carried out at work.
Again, business processes are not yet registered, the organization is constantly in a state of change. And despite the fact that the management of the company takes various stimulating steps to make it good for the people working in the company, the salary rises, bonuses are paid, corporate events are held.
However, people still have a lot of fatigue, and still the company's specialists look aside. Maybe it's calmer there, let the business develop less, but still, I really want certainty.
It turns out that the faster the company grows, the faster the business runs away from the management system. Sometimes this leads to lethal consequences for the business itself.
The more important role in changing conditions, the more human factor begins to play. Operational activity is easier to understand in this case. It is almost impossible to make strategically effective changes within the current company's activities.
Therefore, in most cases, managers try to limit themselves to some local, local, small changes. Spending all their free time, all their efforts on what is included in the solution of all operational tasks.
The strategy goes sideways. The manager is busy solving specific things. If you look at the presented schedule, you will see that the current activities should be devoted 20% of the time to operational management.
And 80% should be directed to development, strategy development, strategic decisions. As I said, in a fast-growing business, everything is usually the other way around.
80% of their time is devoted to the current activities and solving current issues. And only 20% is devoted to strategic management.
The next section is about the mission and vision. The slide shows a picture that characterizes the importance of the stages of strategy development. And in fact, the place of vision, the hypothesis of business development.
If we imagine strategic management as a process stretched into a chain, we understand that it is a transition from the state as it is to the state as it should be.
There can be a huge number of ways between these two states. It is important for us to choose the path that, according to the owners of top management companies, is optimal.
To do this, we need to go through several stages. We need to understand what strategic goals the company owner pursues.
They are somewhere in the background. If the owner plans to sell his business, we will not tell anyone about it, but his actions will be completely different from the mission that is related to the development and promotion of this business.
When we have formulated the strategic goals of the company, we move on to the formation of a vision of the future state in which we would like the company to be.
To do this, we must take into account the interests of all interested groups. According to the model of the five forces of Porter, these are consumers, suppliers, competitors, and so on.
Based on the vision and analysis of the internal and external environment, we must build a strategy.
If we put this into a hierarchical structure, then you can see the first stage of the strategy development. Strategic diagnostics, then we develop a mission, then we develop a strategic vision or concept.
Then we set goals, and the development of the strategy itself is poured into the goals of the projects, planned results, budgets, and so on.
In each step of the implementation of the strategy, we will monitor it, we will control it, and as a result, we get a built-in system of management of the company's development.
The main thing that can be achieved by long-term planning of goals is to see the future, which may seem insignificant, and some management problems, as well as others, which in everyday life we may not even notice.
These goals are divided into several components. What position should the company take in the economy? Here, priorities are determined in the market hierarchy. Will it be a leader in the market or will it be a leader?
What will be the main directions of the business? Here, efforts are accumulated in the promising sectors of activity. What is the structure of the future government? Here, the growth of the company and the development of the staff is directed.
What policy will be applied in relation to the staff? Guarantees or focus on motivation? In the process of formulating goals and directions, the manager will have to tie up new important contradictions in the ideas that inevitably arise during the detailing.
This task can be solved on its own. Of course, new questions will be raised, which require additional clarification. At this stage, it is possible to use the company's resources to develop the goal, to connect these resources to the goal development, to create a working group, including top management, middle management,
and to include them in the work on goals, so that these goals are measurable and understandable, and, most importantly, in their implementation into the organization.
Of course, the goal that the manager formulates for himself does not require a voice. It already gives a certain advantage over some intuitive management, but the same goal, shared by the team, many times increases the likelihood that it will be achieved in the future.
Long-term vision. We are talking about vision now. This is a combination of rational and emotional. In addition to the final goal, in addition to the ways to achieve these goals, which must be present in the vision, there is an answer to the most secret question about the purpose of the company, its key values,
and principles. The presence of a specific image of the future allows you to change to the opposite direction of the strategic management vector, moving from planning from the past, from the achieved, to planning from the future, to planning from the final goal.
In this case, strategic and tactical initiatives are not assessed by the criteria of today, but by how well they will work to achieve the desired future and will correspond to the basic values that are embedded in the company, in the corporate culture and ideology of the company.
Over time, long-term vision acquires a more specific form. We said that strategic management is a permanent, cyclical process. According to the formulation of the vision, the company is constantly addressing with a certain periodicity and, accordingly, corrects it, while preserving the basic principles embedded in the vision.
At the same time, in the long-term vision, as in the matryoshka, smaller matryoshkas are laid down, specific short-term and medium-term strategic initiatives, which are equipped with their own micro-vision, which must correspond with the future that is formulated in the global vision, in the long-term vision.
The feedback from the future allows for mutual complementation and reinforcement of the strategic and tactical initiatives. Therefore, the vision has certain roles, certain aspects and installations that it must solve.
On the one hand, vision is a time machine. It gives a bright picture, which is described by large strokes. It must contain a description of the mechanism that will ensure the movement to the future state, which we designated as desirable.
At the same time, the true value of vision is not only in the predetermination of the direction of movement, but in the fact that this movement will be endowed with a certain meaning.
The second role is the reflection of the uniqueness of the company, its individuality, the discovery of its specific, difficult to imitate competences.
The uniqueness, like nothing else, increases the value of the company in the eyes of customers, public, competitors, and serves as a prerequisite for winning the leading positions in the market.
The vision must be realistic and idealistic. The global goal should be beyond the limits of today's capabilities of the company. It is necessary to make certain efforts to achieve it.
But the personnel, top management, middle management must believe in the achievability of this goal, understand that with the maximum mobilization of their resources and the energy of the team, this goal is possible and achievable.
The vision should inspire people, win them to go into a new orbit, to a sharp increase in personal contribution to the achievement of the goals set.
The vision should be concise, clear and simple. It should be realized by every employee, regardless of his or her position in the service industry and educational level.
The vision should be true to the values ​​that are accepted in the company. Economic indicators, profitability, share profitability, quality of products, if they are not tied to quality indicators, customer relations, level of personnel competence, opportunities for development, working conditions.
This is a small emotional and motivational charge. Only by tying qualitative and quantitative indicators can we achieve the formation of an ideology and loyalty to the company's ideas.
The emphasis should be placed on the values ​​of the company, not on abstract values. If you ask the management of Western companies, they all say that they are socially oriented, do they protect the environment?
Everyone will think and say no. No, because it is economically uninteresting, not purposeful. But in fact, there are companies that have tied both the environment and economic profitability, and as a result, are positioned as socially oriented.
In a way, the emphasis is placed on those values that are in conflict with the values ​​of individuals who join the organization. Each person who works in this company. For example, self-respect, professional growth, public prestige.
There are people who are ready to work in a large company, even for less money, because they at least get a line in the resume that they worked in this large company. For them, this is public prestige.
For example, the vision of Henry Ford's dream. I will create a car for the general public. The price will be so low that its acquisition will not become a problem for a person with a decent salary. He will be able to enjoy his family, rest in nature. Horses will disappear from the highways and cars will be perceived as the norm. This vision dates back to the beginning of the last century.
Maybe the vision in the form of a motto. In the 60s, Nike formulated its vision as follows. Beat Adidas. Or Stanford University, the 1940s. Become Harvard. Well, I mean the university on the western coast.
General Electric, the 1980s. The conquest and retention of each separate department of the corporation as position number one or two in their industry.
This is a clearly formulated vision for the strategic needs of the company. It can be transformed for various categories of people. The company's mission only then becomes strategic when it meets three requirements.
The company's mission is to provide a clear answer to a number of key questions.
These questions are asked by everyone, without exception, people in contact with the company itself or its products. How does the company run its business? Its strategy, structure, employees, resources. How does the company work? What are the procedures and activities of the company? What does the company do? What are its principles and values?
The mission is to develop a strategy, to make decisions, to resolve conflicts, to build a system of motivation for the staff. In addition, the mission is to form unity within the organization.
The mission is to form a corporate spirit and to build a corporate culture. The mission is to form and consolidate a certain image of the organization in the representation of market subjects, be they its clients, suppliers or competitors.
When we formulate a mission, we must reflect a number of aspects in its content. We must reflect the target orientation of the organization, we must reflect the sphere of its activity, products, markets, resources used, the opportunities and capabilities of the organization's competitiveness,
its value system and defining traditions, the interests of society, consumers, owners and staff that we try to take into account in our activities.
Thus, the mission formulation will reflect three aspects. The tasks of the company from the point of view of its main services or products, its main markets and main technologies.
Simply put, we get an answer to what kind of entrepreneurship this company is engaged in, the external environment in relation to the company that defines the working principles of the company and the culture of the organization, what type of working climate exists within the company, what type of people should work in this company.
Let's look at some examples of missions. A large energy company. We produce and supply energy and services in the best way, reliably and profitably, today and always, multiplying and using the accumulated potential for the benefit of society and shareholders.
Another example. This mission that we have just considered is a single mission for all groups. There may be a situation when the mission is dictated by different groups.
For example, in one of the groups of companies there is an external mission aimed at consumers. Professional satisfaction of the needs of a wide range of Russian and foreign clients, wholesale and retail, with high-quality goods and services at affordable prices.
There may be an internal mission for shareholders. The creation of an effective mechanism of corporate and financial management of the group and the company, due to their integration into a diversified holding, to ensure the sustainable development of the business and profit.
And finally, the internal mission can be aimed at employees. For example, the increase in the efficiency of the work of employees due to a more specific task setting, distribution of responsibility, implementation of motivation systems and stimulation of employees, depending on the tasks and results of the company.
Please note that these three units are controversial. The managers are still arguing whether the mission should be unified or it can be different for different categories.
In my experience, there was a situation when the mission should have been different. In one of the companies, shareholders at a general meeting, together with the top management, without thinking, voiced a mission for the owners and for the top management.
The company was at a start-up, and therefore the mission sounded like this. Our company should grow in N-RUS for a certain period. This requires a lot of effort from both managers and staff, but there can be losses in the fight.
And we can lose some staff that will not withstand this rhythm of work.
Despite the fact that the company has really grown significantly over the reporting period, people left with an internal attitude that they do not need this company. If it happens that we do not withstand the rhythm, they will part with us without any problems. Naturally, this can cause negative consequences for the company.
After the mission and vision are formulated, the goals are formulated. The company's goals can be associated with profitability. Then the profit that you would like to achieve is indicated, or the rate of increase in profit that you would like to achieve.
Please note that the goals are usually formulated in the Smart format, which will be discussed in one of the modules.
Smart means specificity, measurement, achievability, significance, and time determination.
Thus, all goals can be divided into the following. Goals associated with profit, as I said. Goals associated with market proposal. Goals associated with productivity, for example, increase the productivity of labor by 10%.
Goals associated with production, for example, open a new product line. Goals associated with the formation and use of financial assets, for example, attract financial assets in such a volume for such a period.
Goals associated with production capacity, for example, build a new building for such a period. Goals associated with research and innovation. Goals associated with the implementation and provision of internal processes in the organization.
Goals associated with regulation of the activities of such a unit in such a period. Goals associated with human resources, for example, increase the salary, reduce the turnover by 2% per year. These are the types of goals that the organization can pursue.
If the goals are not formalized, incomprehensible, then there is a risk of actions that do not correspond to the goals set, do not correspond to the strategy chosen by the company.
Formalization of goals stimulates discussion within the company, which reduces the risk of incomprehension or incomplete understanding of the goals set. As a result, when the assessment of their achievements is carried out in the framework of the implementation of the control for the implementation of the strategy, there will be no problems associated with the fact that people simply did not understand what goal was in front of them.
If the goals are clearly defined, there may be conflicts between them. If the goals are clearly formulated and presented in the Smart format, these conflicts can be found and eliminated in the process of coordination.
Moreover, if the goals are formulated, then it is possible to accurately determine the criteria for assessing both the activities of the company as a whole and each unit to which this goal is decomposed.
Below in the graph you can see the tree of goals of the upper level, where the main goal is laid in the mission. And this main goal is transformed into corporate goals, product goals, operational goals, management goals and resource goals.
The example of what a corporate goal may look like is shown below. Now, please, complete the task presented in your conspiracy.
Bonus
for a diversified company.
This can be done as shown in the slide,
in the form of a pyramid of strategies.
At the top of the pyramid is a corporate strategy.
Below is a business strategy, functional and operational strategies.
The strategy of the company in general implies a set of rules for making decisions
that the organization is guided by in its activities.
Accordingly, the corporate strategy is the company's documented goals
and systematized judgments on the ways to achieve them.
They are just the top of the pyramid.
Functional strategies are the documented goals in the functional area,
in the area of products, business processes, management, resources
and systematized judgments on the ways to achieve them.
Product strategy is a set of rules for making decisions
that the organization is guided by in its activities
when determining what types of products and technologies
it will develop and apply.
Where and to whom to sell the produced product?
How to achieve superiority over competitors?
Operational strategy is the one that lies at the base of the pyramid.
It is a set of rules for making decisions
that the organization is guided by in its daily activities.
Each type of strategy is responsible in its development.
Corporate strategy is responsible for the development of corporate strategy.
Business strategy is responsible for the company's managers,
for the enterprise that is part of the corporation.
Functional strategies are developed by the managers of the companies.
These are strategies in the area of production, marketing, finance, personnel, etc.
Operational strategies are responsible for the managers of the companies,
managers of production, territorial managers,
when they develop regions and areas.
And if we talk about the events that are supposed to take place at each level of the strategy,
corporate strategy is characterized by events related to the creation and management
of high-productive corporate structure portfolio.
It is acquisition of companies, strengthening of existing business positions,
liquidation of company activities, reorganization of the company,
achieving synergy due to the interaction of various business units
or various structural divisions in the company,
turning the presence of this synergy into a competitive advantage, its use,
establishing certain investment priorities,
directing corporate resources to one or another area of company development,
Business strategy is characterized by events related to the development of measures
aimed at strengthening the company's competitiveness,
at preserving its competitive advantages,
at the formation of a mechanism of reaction to certain external changes that the company faces,
at strengthening and efforts to solve specific and important issues or problems of the companies that are included in the group.
Functional strategy is characterized by events related to the support of business strategy,
the achievement of the goals of the functional division aimed at supporting business strategy,
and finally, operational strategy.
These are actions to solve narrow-special issues and problems related to the achievement of the goals of a specific division.
When we talk about corporate strategy,
we must first of all describe the action plan for managing a company or a group of a company,
a diversified company.
We must define how broad the diversification is.
We must define the approach to the placement of investments between areas of activity,
how the company invests its funds.
We must justify the decision about the refusal of a loss-making or non-attractive business,
a non-profile business.
One of the leading consultants showed the client a presentation that consisted of two slides.
Slide 1. The name of the consultant, his regalia. Slide 2. Non-profile businesses must be eliminated.
This was the end of the presentation.
Next, we must plan actions to expand the economic portfolio,
to create new positions in attractive industries.
All these actions that should be included in corporate strategy are presented on the slide.
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that if a company is not diversified,
the term business strategy will be used to describe corporate strategy.
As a rule, the term business strategy defines the management plan of a company's individual sphere of activity.
Business strategy consists of a number of approaches and directions developed by the management
to achieve the best performance in a particular sphere of activity.
Business strategy focuses on actions and approaches related to management,
aimed at ensuring successful business activities.
The essence of business strategy is to show how to conquer strong and long-term competitive positions in the market.
The essence of business strategy is presented on the slide.
It includes a plan of actions to manage a single type of business.
This is a description of the main competitive approach,
whether it is low costs or differentiation,
again, it is necessary to specify what kind of differentiation,
or it is focusing on specific market niches.
In one of the modules, competitive strategies will be considered,
and this main competitive approach will be explained to you.
Business strategy includes measures related to changes in the industry and other external factors,
that is, how we adapt to these changes.
The approach to vertical integration is indicated,
what it will be like,
complete, partial, zero,
steps to create a competitive position are indicated,
for example, it may not be vertical integration.
The actions to maintain competitive advantages are indicated,
and measures to strengthen these competitive positions and improve performance indicators are carried out.
The key functional strategies are included in the business strategy,
complement it, expand and detail it.
The strategy in the field of production is an operational strategy,
the strategy in the field of marketing, promotion and sales is a marketing strategy,
the strategy in the field of technology is an innovation strategy,
the strategy in the field of personnel is a strategy for managing human resources,
and, finally, the financial strategy.
The business strategy is aimed at establishing and strengthening the long-term competitive position of the company in the market.
To achieve this goal, the business strategy is developed in the above directions.
It should be noted that the development of corporate, business and functional strategies
affects the business functions, direction of activity,
and, in fact, the functions that are assigned to the company's management.
All this forms, in turn, structural links,
which means that certain directions of activity are fixed behind these structural links,
business functions are fixed behind these structural links,
and management functions are fixed behind these structural links.
Thus, a business model of organizational culture and the creation process is created.
On the one hand, the model of functions is determined,
on the other hand, the model of structures is determined.
By applying the model of functions to the model of structures,
we get a business model of organizational structure based on the company's developed strategy.
To determine the role of a manager in the creation of a strategy,
we need to look at who participates in the development process.
In the slide, you can see that the participants in the development process of a strategy are
the owner of the company, who formulates the priorities of its development,
the top managers of the company, who formulate the vision and goals,
as well as determine the quality and quantity of the measurers of these goals,
the strategic development department or the strategic development management,
or the management of organizational development.
In different companies, these people can be called in different ways.
They are engaged in the preparation of an analytical base,
on the basis of which the company's own strategy will be built.
They build forecasts,
they develop the working material that will become the company's strategy in the future.
Very often there is a fourth participant in the development process of a strategy,
these are external consultants.
They are invited to demonstrate an independent view from the outside.
They can expand their vision, they have experience in strategic development
and they can perform the function of a moderator.
It is important here that the consultant does not have a desire to write for the company,
to offer it a strategy, and then say,
Such a position usually ends with the fact that the strategy developed by the consultants
is put on the shelf, dust is periodically blown off it,
they look at the stamp, which means what a great name this consultant had.
And no one is engaged in the implementation of hard-written works.
If we look at the strategy and the creation of a strategy again, as a process,
what will we see?
First, we analyzed the external environment at the macro level,
look at the graph,
then at the micro level,
made some conclusions and assumptions about future development,
set goals and saw the impact.
After all, to implement a strategy, opportunities are needed.
They can be financial, resourceful, but they are needed.
The competence of top management is to eliminate this impact,
so that the goals acquire the status of plans, actions,
which are provided by certain resource opportunities,
when the centers of responsibility and control for the implementation of the strategy are determined,
and clear time guidelines are established,
which should be fulfilled at various stages of the company's strategic development.
In his activity, during the development of a strategy,
the manager can play different roles.
He can be the chief architect.
In some companies, one person, this can be the head of the company,
takes on the role of the chief strategist,
unilaterally forming the key elements of the strategy.
This does not mean that he is the author of all the ideas on which the strategy is built.
This does not mean that he has collected and analyzed all the necessary information.
No, as a rule, the process of building a strategy is preceded by a certain brain attack,
which is attracted by subordinates, professional analysis of information is done.
But this means that the person, the chief strategist,
acts as the chief and only architect of the strategy.
He leads its development, he sets goals.
In principle, the approach of the chief architect is characteristic for the company,
whose heads are at the same time their owners, their founders.
The next possible role is delegating.
In this approach, the manager, responsible for the development of the strategy,
delegates part of his powers to trusted subordinates,
to the underlying managers,
to competent working groups of employees of different companies,
maybe to an independent working commission,
maybe to a group of consultants who specialize in the development of the strategy.
Delegating such events as brain attacks, analysis,
development of some major events,
certain components of the strategy,
allows to attract managers and employees,
to involve them in the process of development of the strategy.
And if they participated in it, if they experienced this process,
as a rule, you already support what you took part in.
Accordingly, the changes that the implementation of the strategy implies
will be met by developers with a positive attitude.
They will support the changes that are laid down in the strategy.
The next possible role of the manager is a collective approach.
The manager, responsible for the creation of the strategy,
relies on the help of the advice of his colleagues and subordinates.
He develops a kind of a compromise version of the strategy.
Linear, functional managers of different companies
and different departments.
There can be several very novice managers,
but who have a creative approach.
And, of course, veterans.
Veterans who act as observers.
Their task is not to be afraid to speak bitter truth,
give wise advice, and so on.
And finally, another role that may be inherent
to a manager participating in the development of a strategy.
This is the role of attracting internal reserves.
In this approach, the higher management offers
individual employees and a whole working group
to propose proposals for the launch of new product lines,
the development of new areas of activity.
The main idea here is that anyone can open up in the company
and thereby identify leaders and talents.
Top management in this case will select proposals
that are promising for them.
And, accordingly, provide developers with the opportunities,
both organizational and resource opportunities,
so that these ideas are calculated, and then implemented.
Thus, new components of the strategy appear,
and their developers, accordingly, receive the opportunity
to get new, unique, interesting,
interesting for them, areas of activity, and lead it.
We have discussed today a significant introductory topic of strategic management.
Namely, we introduced the concept of strategy, strategic management,
identified the object and subject of strategic management,
formulated an approach to the evolution of the concept of strategy,
considered 10 schools of strategic management,
considered the roles of managers in the formation of a strategy,
and considered how the mission and vision of the company is made.
Thank you very much for your attention!